CBASS system & experimental protocol overview

The Coral Bleaching Automated Stress System (CBASS) is an experimental system to conduct short‐term acute heat stress assays (see Figure). The system consists of 4 replicate 10 L flow‐through tanks that allows running four independent temperature profiles with light settings adjusted to match in situ light fields. The temperature in each tank is controlled by IceProbe Thermoelectric chillers (Nova Tec) and 200W titanium aquarium heaters (Schego) linked to a custom‐built controller (Arduino MEGA 2560); the light is controlled manually using an LI‐193 Spherical Underwater Quantum Sensor (LI‐COR) and manual adjustment of dimmable 165W full spectrum LED aquarium lights (Galaxyhydro) to match reef in situ light fields (~600 μmol quanta m−2 s−1). HOBO Pendant Temperature Data Loggers are used to record the temperature of each tank for the duration of the experiment.

For the experimental determination of thermal thresholds, collected coral fragments are distributed over the 4 replicated flow‐through tanks, so that fragments from each colony (i.e., genotype) are in each treatment condition (2 × control/baseline − 30°C, 2 × medium − 33°C, 2 × high − 36°C, 2 × extreme − 39°C). The start of the experiment is typically at noon (12:00 hr) and the 4 treatment conditions are as follows: the control tank is maintained at the monthly maximum mean (MMM) of the site of collection for the entire experiment. The remaining three short‐term acute heat stress treatment tanks are heated to MM +3°C, MM +6°C, and MM +9°C over a period of 3 hr. The respective temperature is held for 3 hr, and then decreased back to 30°C over the course of 1 hr (19:00 hr). All corals are kept at 30°C overnight until sampling the following morning (08:00 hr), completing the 18‐hr short‐term acute heat stress assay. All tanks are continuously supplied with local  reef water and photosynthetic active radiation of 600 µmol photons m−2 s−1 on a 12:12 hr day/night cycle.


Figure. Overview of the Coral Bleaching Automated Stress System (CBASS). (A) CBASS featuring 4 light- and temperature-independent, flow-through tanks with 2 replicate units (1a/b: baseline temperature based on maximum monthly mean (MMM) of tested site, 2a/b: MMM +3°C, 3a/b: MMM +6°C, 4a/b: MMM +9°C). (B) 18 hour-long programmed temperature profile for assessment of coral thermal tolerance thresholds. Shading represents the ramp up and ramp down of the profile. Asterisk = measurement of photosynthetic efficiency as proxy for coral health. 
